RFC for Mango on FDB (#407)
apache/couchdb-documentation: rfcs/006-mango-fdb.md

name: Formal RFC
about: Submit a formal Request For Comments for consideration by the team.
title: ‘Mango JSON indexes in FoundationDB’
labels: rfc, discussion
assignees: ‘’

- - - -

[NOTE]: # ( ^^ Provide a general summary of the RFC in the title above. ^^ )

# Introduction

This document describes the data model and indexing management for Mango json indexes in FoundationDB.

## Abstract

This document details the data model for storing Mango indexes.  The basic model is that we would have a namespace for storing defined indexes and then a dedicated namespace per index for the key/values for a given index. Indexes will be updated in the transaction that a document is written to FoundationDB. When an index is created on an existing database, a background task will build the index up to the Sequence that the index was created at.

## Requirements Language

[NOTE]: # ( Do not alter the section below. Follow its instructions. )

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”,
“SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”,  “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this
document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC 2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

## Terminology

> `Sequence`: a 13 byte value formed by combining the current `Incarnation` of the database and the `Versionstamp` of the transaction. Sequences are monotonically increasing even when a database is relocated across FoundationDB clusters. See (RFC002)[LINK TBD]  for a full explanation.

Reviewer: You will probably be using the tuple encoding for the keys, and the `Incarnation` will therefore be a variable length integer that will be one byte the vast majority of the time (under values of 249 I believe), but will not be strictly speaking 13 bytes.

Author: Thanks @ryanworl, yes the incarnation will be a single byte. I just copied and pasted that section from here https://github.com/apache/couchdb-documentation/pull/397/files#diff-5a51b92701c50f4d70a06d3a85daf8e9R40, maybe I should be a little more explicit in what I mean there.

Reviewer: I would recommend _not_ making it a fixed-length byte string of length one and instead use an integer. It takes three additional bytes to encode it as a fixed-length byte string if the `Incarnation` is zero and two additional bytes otherwise.

Author: Ah thanks @ryanworl, I'll mention that in the other RFC.

Reviewer 2: @ryanworl the motivation behind the use of a fixed-length byte string was to ensure the sortability of Sequences in their external hexadecimal string representation in CouchDB's HTTP API. @davisp reminded me that the variable-length integer encoding in the tuple layer does generate bytes that always sort correctly (of course), so I can see where this is a good improvement. Thanks for pointing it out.

In a future release of CouchDB with FoundationDB the external behaviour of Mango will remain the same but internally will have its own indexes and index management. This will allow for Mango indexes to be updated in the same transaction where a write request happens - index on write. Later we can also look at adding Mango specific functionality.

## Data Model

### Index Definitions

A Mango index is defined as:

```json
{
  name: ‘view-name’ - optional will be auto-generated
  index: {
    fields: [‘fieldA’, ‘fieldB’] - fields to be indexed
  },
  partial_filter_selector {} - optional filter to process documents before adding to the index
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: Format trick:

```javascript
	{
	  name: "view-name" // optional will be auto-generated
	  index: {
	    fields: ["fieldA", "fieldB"] // fields to be indexed
	  },
	  partial_filter_selector: {} // optional filter to process documents before adding to the index
	}
```

The `_id` is kept to avoid duplicate keys and to be used to retrieve the full document for a Mango query.
For now, the value will be null, later we can look at storing covering indexes. aggregate values or materialised views.

### Key sorting

In CouchDB 2.x ICU collation is used to sort string key’s when added to the index’s b-tree. The current way of using ICU string collation won’t work with FoundationDB. To resolve this strings will be converted to an ICU sort string before being stored in FDB.  This is an extra performance overhead but will only be done when one when writing a key into the index.

CouchDB has a defined [index collation specification](http://docs.couchdb.org/en/stable/ddocs/views/collation.html#collation-specification) that the new Mango design must adhere to. Each key added to a Mango index will be converted into a composite key or tuple with the first value in the tuple representing the type that the key so that it would be sorted correctly. Below is an example of the type keys to be used:

\x00 NULL
\x26 False
\x27 True
\x30 Numbers
\x40 Text converted into a sort string
\x50 Array
\x60 Objects

> An example for a number key would be (\x30, 1). Just too note, Null and Boolean values won’t need to be composite keys as the type key is the value.

Reviewer 4: s/too note/to note

Reviewer 4: or simply Note: Null and Boolean...

Author: Thanks. I updated it.

### Index Limits

This design has certain defined limits for it to work correctly:

* The index definition (name, fields and partial_filter_selector) cannot exceed 100 KB FDB value limit

> * The sorted keys for an index cannot exceed the 10 KB key limit

Reviewer 4: "sorted keys" - is this the same as the keys emitted for indexing records?

Author: Correct. They are.

> * To be able to update the index in the transaction that a document is updated in, there will have to be a limit on number of Mango indexes for a database so that the transaction stays within the 10MB transaction limit. This limit is still TBD based on testing.

Reviewer 3: + calculation help from @alexmiller-apple https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/4976e0b7e3df89c5d64f37b5299b04c2ed01088f357be8aceaeedec1@%3Cdev.couchdb.apache.org%3E

## Index building and management

When an index is created on an existing database, the index will need to be built for all existing documents in the database. The process for building a new index would be:

1. When a user defines a new index on an existing database, save the index definition along with the `sequence`  the index was added at and set the `build_status` to `building`  so it won’t be used to service queries. 

> 2. Any write requests (document updates) after that must read the new index definition and update the index. When updating the new index, the index writers should assume that previous versions of the document have already been indexed.

Reviewer 5: Can you elaborate to this? Say you have a transaction that does a write/update. In that same transaction, I'm assuming you want the index to incorporate this new write/update. What do you mean by "read the new index definition"?

> 3. At the same time a background process will start reading sections of the changes feed and building the index, this background process will keep processing the changes read until it reaches the sequence number that the index was saved at. Once it reaches that point, the index is up to date and `build_status` will be marked as `active` and the index will be used to service queries.

Reviewer 5: revisiting: @garrensmith this background process will now likely be a couch_jobs processs right??

5. An index progress tracker will also be added. This will use `doc_count` for the database, and then have a counter value that the background workers can increment with the number of documents it updated for each batch update.  It would also be updated on write requests while the index is in building mode.

> 6. Some thing to explore is splitting the building of the index across multiple worker, it should be possible to use the [`get_boundary_keys` ](https://apple.github.io/foundationdb/api-python.html?highlight=boundary_keys#fdb.locality.fdb.locality.get_boundary_keys) api call on the changes feed to get the full list of changes feed keys grouped by partition boundaries and then split that by workers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
6. Something to explore is splitting the building of the index across multiple worker, it should be possible to use the [`get_boundary_keys` ](https://apple.github.io/foundationdb/api-python.html?highlight=boundary_keys#fdb.locality.fdb.locality.get_boundary_keys) api call on the changes feed to get the full list of changes feed keys grouped by partition boundaries and then split that by workers.
```

* `build_status` will have two options:
  * `active` which indicates the index is ready to service queries 
  * `building` if the index is still being built

* `sequence` is the sequence that the index is created at.
* `index_version` will be used to version each index to allow for easier upgrades if we make any changes to the index design later
* `?BUILD_INFO` is the sequence the background build has built the index up to and the number of rows in the index.

### Indexes

Each index defined in the Index Definition would have an index keyspace where the database’s documents are stored and sorted via the keys defined in the index’s definition. The data model for each defined index would be:

`(?DATABASE, ?INDEXES, <index_name>, <indexed_fields>, <_id>) = null`

* `index_name` is the name of the index
* `indexed_fields` are the fields in the document that are indexed from the fields in the index definition
* `_id` is the `_id` of the document that is indexed and used to retrieve the full document for a Mango query.

For now, the value will be null, later we can look at storing covering indexes. aggregate values or materialized views.

### Key sorting

> In CouchDB 2.x ICU collation is used to sort string key’s when added to the index’s b-tree. The current way of using ICU string collation won’t work with FoundationDB. To resolve this strings will be converted to an ICU sort string before being stored in FDB. This is an extra performance overhead but will only be done when one when writing a key into the index. 

Reviewer 6: > only be done when one when writing a key into the index. 

typo

## Index building and management

When an index is created on an existing database, the index will need to be built for all existing documents in the database. The process for building a new index would be:

1. When a user defines a new index on an existing database, save the index definition along with the `sequence`  the index was added at and set the `build_status` to `building` so it won’t be used to service queries. 
2. Any write requests (document updates) after the saved index definition will update the index with the document update. Index writers should assume that previous versions of the document have already been indexed.
3. At the same time a background process via `couch_jobs` will start reading sections of the changes feed and building the index, this background process will keep processing the changes read until it reaches the sequence number that the index was saved at. Once it reaches that point, the index is up to date and `build_status` will be marked as `active` and the index can be used to service queries.

> 4. There is some subtle behavior around step 3 that is worth mentioning. The background process will have the 5-second transaction limit, so it will process smaller parts of the changes feed. Which means that it won’t have one consistent view of the changes feed throughout the index building process. This will lead to a conflict situation when the background process transaction is adding a document to the index while at the same time a write request has a transaction that is updating the same document. There are two possible outcomes to this, if the background process wins, the write request will get a conflict. At that point the write request will try to process the document again, read the old values for that document, remove them from the index and add the new values to the index. If the write request wins, and the background process gets a conflict, then the background process can try again, the document would have been removed from its old position in the changes feed and moved to the later position, so the background process won’t see the document and will then move on to the next one. 

Reviewer 6: > This will lead to a conflict situation

Is this a conflict or a race? Maybe both?
